e $Id: Relnotes,v 1.26 2006-10-17 21:37:54-07 kst Exp $
# $Source: /home/kst/gx-map-redacted/Relnotes,v $

Release notes for gx-map

Release 0.5.3, ??? 2006-10-??

    Miscellaneous minor bug fixes.

    Improvements in locking code and cacheing code.

    The "gx-map" command is no longer an alias for "gx-request".
    It now simply prints an error message and exits.

    If the Time::HiRes Perl module is not available, the "gettimeofday"
    may be used instead (though it's recommended to install Time::HiRes
    instead).  See INSTALL for details.

    New command: gx-check-index
	This incorporates the functionality of the "gx-map-cacl"
	tool into gx-map.  This is primarily intended for use at
	SDSC, but it could be used at other sites if a CA provides
	an appropriate index file.

    New command: gx-cron-job
	Rather than invoking individual commands from a complex
	set of cron jobs, you can just invoke gx-cron job every 1
	or 5 minutes.  A configuration file controls which commands
	are executed when.  gx-cron job may also be run as a daemon,
	bypassing crond.

    New command: gx-install-cadesc
	Installs a gx-map-cadesc-*.tar.gz tarball, containing CA
	description files, into an existing installation.  This removes
	the need for a full new release of the gx-map package when
	CA information changes.

    New command: gx-util-test
	This is a test program for some of the functions in the
	Gridmap_Utils Perl module.

    New command: gx-watch-lock
	This watches for stale lock files.

    gx-request:
	Issue a warning for DNs that are handled automatically (e.g.,
	ones handled by gx-check-index).  The set of DNS to warn about
	can be configured by editing the file "etc/gx-map/auto.txt".
	Added "-literal-dn" option (useful for removing certain
	invalid entries).

    gx-ca-update:
	New option: -[no]download.
	By default, gx-ca-update attempts to download files as needed.
	With "-nodownload", it uses only existing files in the cache
	directory.  This can be useful if multiple instances of gx-map
	are being used on several systems with a shared data directory.
	One instance can run in the default "-download" mode, and
	all the others can depend on the cache files, saving time
	and network traffic.

	If no "-ca" or "-ca-list" option is specified, try to use a
	".ca-list" file in the target directory.

	The "-list-cas" option excludes disabled CAs.  The new
	"-list-all-cas" option shows all CAs, including disabled ones
	(what "-list-cas" formerly did).

Release 0.5.2.2, Sat 2006-08-19

    This is another minor maintenance update for gx-map 0.5.2.
    It was prompted by the impending expiration of the PSC (Pittsburgh
    Supercomputing Center) CA signing certificates and the issuance
    of new certificates replacing them.  It also includes new and
    updated *.cadesc files for some other CAs, particularly for the
    new UK e-Science CA.

    This is a recommended upgrade for TeraGrid sites, and for other
    sites using the PSC Certificate Authorities.

    The updated files are:

        Gridmap_Utils.pm.in (updated VERSION only)
        README (updated version information only)
        Relnotes

        ca/01621954.uk-escience-old.cadesc
            (replaces ca/01621954.uk-escience.cadesc)
        ca/0a2bac92.brgrid.cadesc
        ca/290a3b29.psc-kerberos-1.cadesc  
        ca/8175c1cd.uk-escience-root.cadesc
        ca/85ca9edc.psc-kerberos-old.cadesc
            (replaces ca/85ca9edc.psc-kerberos.cadesc)
        ca/9b88e95b.psc-root.cadesc
        ca/aa99c057.psc-root-old.cadesc
            (replaces ca/aa99c057.psc-root.cadesc)
        ca/acc06fda.psc-hosts.cadesc
        ca/adcbc9ef.uk-escience.cadesc

    If you're already using gx-map 0.5.2 or 0.5.2.1, you can also
    consider just updating the necessary cadesc files.  Be sure to
    remove any obsolete cadesc files with the same hash value (the
    string of 8 hexadecimal digits at the beginning of the file name).

    Maintenance note: Unlike most previous releases, this is not a full
    snapshot.  There is some work in progress that is not yet ready for
    prime time, and is therefore not included in this point release.

    (In a future release, I plan to implement a more convenient method
    of updating cadesc files without upgrading to a new version of
    the gx-map package.)

Release 0.5.2.1, Thu 2006-07-13

    This is a minor maintenance update for gx-map 0.5.2.  It was
    prompted by a change in the URLs for the USC Certificate
    Authorities.  Two other cadesc files were also updated: some
    information for the TACC CA was updated, and two old CAs whose
    signing certificates have expired were marked as disabled.  Also,
    a new bug report was added for a transient (and probably harmless)
    locking failure.

    The updated files are:

        Gridmap_Utils.pm.in (updated VERSION only)
        Relnotes
        ca/2ca73e82.usc-pki-lite-r1.cadesc
        ca/84c1f123.cygrid-old.cadesc
        ca/9a1da9f9.tacc.cadesc
        ca/b57985f0.usc-kerberos-v3.cadesc
        ca/ed99a497.cesnet-old.cadesc
        bugs/bug-0100

    This is a recommended upgrade for TeraGrid sites, and for other
    sites using the USC Certificate Authorities.  (The old USC URLs
    still work, but it's not clear that they'll continue to work.)

    If you're already using gx-map 0.5.2, you can also consider just
    updating the necessary cadesc files:

        ca/2ca73e82.usc-pki-lite-r1.cadesc
        ca/b57985f0.usc-kerberos-v3.cadesc

Release 0.5.2, Fri 2006-06-30

    This release is mostly intended to allow for some changes in the
    TeraGrid Central Database (TGCDB).  It also makes some operations
    more efficient.

    The gx-request commands "-set" and "-dn-list-file" options have
    been removed.

    Handling for different forms of DNs has been enhanced.  Fields of
    certain DNs can have different forms in GT2 (Globus Toolkit
    release 2) vs. GT4.  Some fields have yet another form for the
    web services portion of GT3.

    The "-compatible" option of the gx-gen-mapfile command has been
    removed, and is replaced by two new options:
        -gt2-compatible    : Generate a grid-mapfile compatible with both
                             GT2 and GT3/GT4.  By default, the generated
                             grid-mapfile is *not* compatible with GT2
                             for certain DNs.
        -gt3-compatible    : Generate a grid-mapfile compatible
                             both with GT3 WS (Web Services) and
                             with GT4.  This is rarely necessary.
                             This option can be used together with the
                             "-compatible" option.

    The gx-ca-update command has a new option:
        -gt3-compatible    Generate *.signing_policy files compatible
                           with GT3 web services tools.  This should
                           rarely be necessary or useful.  By default,
                           generated *.signing_policy files are
                           compatible with both GT2 and GT4, and with
                           GT3 pre-WS.

    gx-ca-update's "-force" option now applies to CRLs as well as to
    certificates and signing_policy files.

    Some commands installed in the sbin directory are to be executed
    only by the owner of the gx-map installation.  These commands now
    have their permissions set to 744 (rwxr--r--) during installation.

    Miscellaneous minor bug fixes and enhancements.

    TeraGrid-specific changes (see README.TeraGrid for details):

    The name of the database configuration file (introduced in release
    0.5.1) has been changed from "tgcdb.conf" to "tgcdb.db-config",
    and it is now installed in the correct directory (etc/gx-map rather
    than etc).  The names of some of the fields have been changed.

    On installation, if the GX_PROPAGATE attribute is set to
    "gx-propagate.in.teragrid" (i.e., if you're using the TeraGrid
    specific database code), the etc/gx-map/tgcdb.db-config file
    is created automatically.  You must manually edit this file
    before using gx-ca-update (you will be reminded to do this during
    installation).  The permissions on the tgcdb.db-config file must
    be set to 400 (r--------) or 600 (rw-------).

    In addition to the GX_PROPAGATE attribute, the installation
    configuration file has a new optional attribute, EXTRAS.  The only
    currently supported value for this is TGCDB, which causes the
    TGCDB subsystem to be installed, consisting of the gx-db-request,
    gx-db-gx-requests, and gx-db-dump commands.

    The gx-propagate command has a new option:
        -check-config   Check whether the tgcdb.db-config file is ok.
                        If not, silently exit with an error indication.
    This is used by gx-check-requests to determine whether the
    tgcdb.db-config file has been updated.  If not, it refuses to run
    (unless you use "gx-check-requests -nopropagate").

Release 0.5.1, 2006-04-15

    This is a new major release.  Some file formats have changed.

    This release changes the name of the "gx-map" client program to
    "gx-request".  For backward compatibility, it's still available as
    "gx-map", but that may be removed in a future release.  The idea
    is to avoid confusion between the name of the client program and
    the name of the package as a whole.  (This change was actually
    made in release 0.4.5.)

    The gx-cleanup-logs command is new.

    The gx-remove-locks command is new.

    The optional gx-propagate command is new.

    Man pages have finally been added.  The documentation is written
    in Perl's "POD" format and automatically converted to man page
    format during configuration.  The raw *.pod files are also
    installed in the "doc" subdirectory.  The gx-map(7) man page
    provides an overview of the system.  The gx-map-security(7) man
    page discusses security considerations.  Other man pages document
    individual commands and file formats.

    New command-line options for gx-request:
    (The -quick-add and -quick-remove options are intended to replace
    most of the need for the -interactive option.)
        -quick-add          Add a mapping for the user's current proxy
                            or user certificate.
        -quick-remove       Remove a mapping for the user's current proxy
                            or user certificate.
        -set                Set mappings for the specified user, giving
                            zero or more DNs which replace all existing
                            DNs for that user.
        -default-dn         Extract a DN from the user's current proxy
                            or user certificate.
        -dn-list-file       Read a list of DNs from a specified text file.
                            Used only with the "-set" option.
    The "-secondary" option has been removed.

    New command-line options for gx-check-requests:
        -[no]propagate      Invoke gx-propagate as appropriate.
                            Has no effect if gx-propagate is not installed.
        -dryrun             Passed to the gx-propagate command.
                            Has no effect if gx-propagate is not installed.
    The "-namespace" option has been removed.

    New command-line options for gx-gen-mapfile:
        -compatible         Generate a grid-mapfile compatible with both
                            GT2 and GT3/GT4.  (This was the default
                            behavior in earlier gx-map releases.)
                            By default, the grid-mapfile is compatible
                            only with GT3/GT4.
        -merge-file file    Merge an existing grid-mapfile into the
                            generated grid-mapfile
        -[no]rcs            Check the generated grid-mapfile into RCS.
                            The default is "-rcs"; use "-norcs"
                            to disable.
        -force              Force an update regardless of the timestamps
                            of the input and output files.
    New command-line options for gx-ca-update:
        -ca-list            Specify a text file containing a list of CAs.
        -permissions        Specify octal permissions for installed files;
                            default is 444.
    The "-all-cas" option has been removed.

    A number of minor bugs have been corrected (none of them are
    serious security flaws).  See the "bugs" subdirectory for details.

    A new subsystem for propagating grid-mapfile information
    across sites has been implemented.  The optional "gx-propagate"
    command acts as a plug-in for the "gx-check-requests' command.
    A version is provided that's designed specifically to work on the
    TeraGrid, using the TGCDB (TeraGrid Central Database) to propagate
    information from one TeraGrid site to another.  The interface is
    intended to be extensible (it remains to be seen whether it lives
    up the intent).  See the gx-propagate(8) man page for details.

    Some subdirectories of the installation directory have been renamed:
        "etc" --> "etc/gx-map"
        "var" --> "gx-map-data"
            (this is still a symlink to a separate directory)
    This allows gx-map to be installed directly under $GLOBUS_LOCATION
    or another installation directory if desired.  Of course, it can
    still be installed in its own directory.

    The information provided in the installation configuration file
    has been modified.  The old GLOBUS_ADMINS attribute has been
    replaced by GX_MAP_OWNER and ADDITIONAL_ADMINS (it is recommended
    that ADDITIONAL_ADMINS should be empty).  The string %VERSION%
    is expanded to the current version number in the installation
    directory.  See "sample.conf" for details.

    The format of the CA description files (*.cadesc) has been updated.
    The INDEX attribute has been deleted.

    A number of *.cadesc files have been added or updated.

    CA certificates that are not self-signed are checked using
    "openssl verify".

    Permissions for generated files are managed more carefully.

    Better defense against attacks on the world-writable new-requests
    directory.

    The gx-map installation must be owned by, and the gx-check-requests
    and gx-ca-update commands must be executed by, the GX_MAP_OWNER
    account (see sample.conf).  The GX_MAP_OWNER may not be root.

    All downloads are done using the "curl" command; the "ncftp" and
    "wget" commands are no longer used.

    The customizable Gridmap_Valid_Mappings Perl module has been
    dropped.  Its functionality has been incorporated into the
    Gridmap_Utils module.  Gridmap_Valid_Mappings was designed to
    support cross-site propagation; this has been re-implemented
    using gx-propagate.

    Timestamps are stored in microsecond resolution (using the
    Time::HiRes Perl module).

    All distinguished names are handled internally using the GT4
    format rather than the GT2 format (i.e., using "/UID=" rather
    than "/USERID=", and "/emailAddress=" rather than "/Email=").
    A GT2-compatible grid-mapfile is not generated by default; use the
    "-compatible" option if necessary.

    Error checking is more rigorous.  More errors, including transient
    network errors that can be handled by falling back to a cached
    copy of a file, are both logged and reported by e-mail.

    All e-mail messages are logged.

    The system attempts to keep track of reported errors.  For example,
    if a CA web site is down, an e-mail notification will only be sent
    once, not every time gx-ca-update is run.  If the web site comes
    back up and then goes down again, another message will be sent.

    Dropped the idea of "secondary" mappings.  A grid-mapfile entry
    can map a single DN to multiple user names, separated by commas:
        "/O=Foo/OU=Bar/CN=John Doe" jdoe,johnd,sys123
    In gx-map 0.4.X, this was handled by requiring the user to treat
    some mappings as "secondary", a feature that turned out to be
    extremely error-prone.  Now the most recently added mapping
    goes first.  To change the order, re-add another mapping.

    If the data directory doesn't exist (e.g., because an NFS
    filesystem isn't mounted), the commands will bail out with a
    clear error message, rather than dying obscurely on the first
    attempt to access something in the data directory.

    Generated grid-mapfiles are (optionally) checked into RCS.

    In gx-request, a "set" request specifies the complete set of DNs
    for the user; it's equivalent to a "remove-user" request followed
    zero or more "add" requests.  This is designed for interaction
    with the TGCDB.  This option is not available in interactive mode.

    The locking mechanism has been improved, and should avoid race
    conditions when the data directory is on an NFS filesystem.

    Internal code cleanup.

Release 0.4.5, 2005-05-07

    This release changes the name of the "gx-map" client program to
    "gx-request".  For backward compatibility, it's still available
    as "gx-map".  The idea is to avoid confusion between the name of
    the client program and the name of the package as a whole.

    Bugs fixed in this release:
    bug-0019 Change name of gx-map client to gx-request

Release 0.4.4, 2005-05-07

    This is a bug fix release.

    The web server for the DOEGrids CA's CRL has a bug that affects the
    cache mechanism.  This release includes a workaround for that bug.

    The Perl getpwuid function on MacOS X behaves differently than
    on other platforms (the result includes an extra element),
    which caused the gx-map command to fail.  This release allows
    for the difference.

    Bugs fixed in this release:
    bug-0020 Work around web server problem for DOEGrids CA CRL
    bug-0024 Don't assume Perl's getpw* functions return 9 elements

Release 0.4.3, 2005-04-26

    This release fixes a minor (and mostly harmless) oversight
    in release 0.4.2.  The file gx-map.conf.in is part of the
    new configuration system, which is not yet complete.  It was
    inadvertently included in release 0.4.2, which could cause some
    confusion.  Release 0.4.3 omits this file (and updates a few
    bug reports).

    There is no functional difference between releases 0.4.2 and 0.4.3.

    Bugs fix in this release:
    bug-0021 gx-map.conf.in mistakenly included in 0.4.2 release

Release 0.4.2, 2005-04-17

    This is primarily a bug fix release, intended to be included
    in NMI release 7.  It also includes some updated *.cadesc files
    (including a new CERTIFICATE_SHA1 attribute).

    This release also includes a "bugs" directory containing several
    bug reports.

    Bugs fixed in this release:
    bug-0001 Removing a secondary mapping crashes gx-gen-mapfile
    bug-0002 Double usernames for primary+secondary mappings
    bug-0003 "ci" command can change requests.log permissions
    bug-0005 New feature: MISSING_CRL_OK attribute in cadesc files.
        (changed attribute name to ALLOW_MISSING_CRL)
    bug-0006 Use SHA1 fingerprints in gx-ca-update
    bug-0009 Better tracebacks on errors

Release 0.4.1, 2004-11-30

    This is a bug fix release.  In release 0.4.0, I inadvertently did
    not implement the REQUESTS_LOG_PERMISSIONS configuration option.
    Instead, it unconditionally set the permissions of the requests.log
    file to 400 (readable only by the owner).  This is now corrected.
    (You can still set REQUESTS_LOG_PERMISSIONS to 400 if you don't
    want the requests.log file to be world-readable.)

Release 0.4.0, 2004-11-26

    (I've decided to call this release 0.4.0 rather than 0.4 so the
    name of the tarball will sort properly in a directory listing if
    there's a 0.4.1 release.)

    Like previous releases, gx-map 0.4.0 is still somewhat lacking in
    coherent documentation.  It is therefore recommended for users who
    want to upgrade from gx-map 0.3, or who are willing to spend some
    time getting the system working.  Future releases will include
    man pages.

    This release includes several new tools:

        gx-ingest reads an existing grid-mapfile and generates a
        script that invokes gx-map to incorporate the entries into
        the database.

        gx-ca-update downloads and installs certificates, CRLs, and
        signing_policy files.  See README.CA and README.CA-SECURITY
        in this distribution for more information.  Note that this
        can be used independently of the gx-map command; even if you
        don't use gx-map to maintain your grid-mapfile, you can still
        use gx-ca-update to maintain your CA files.

        gx-convert-log converts data from a previous gx-map
        installation for use with gx-map 0.4.

        gx-admins reads an existing requests.log file and guess which
        users are treated as administrators (useful when upgrading
        from gx-map 0.3).

    Multiple user names can be supported for a grid-mapfile entry by
    treating some mappings as "secondary".

    An administrator may use the "-source" option to specify the
    source of a mapping; this will eventually be used to manage
    cross-site propagation.

    The gx-map system depends critically on checking file ownership
    to confirm that a request was made by an authorized user.
    The gx-check-requests command now fails if a non-root user is
    able to use chown on a file in the new-requests directory.

    The generated grid-mapfile is compatible with both GT2 (OpenSSL
    0.9.6) and GT3 (OpenSSL 0.9.7).  (The expand-grid-mapfile
    command used by some sites with gx-map 0.3 is no longer needed.)
    See <http://bugzilla.globus.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=575>
    for more information on this issue.

    The syntax of the GLOBUS_ADMINS configuration variable changed from 0.3
    to 0.4.0.  The argument is now a series of one or more space-delimited
    Unix user names.  Group names are no longer allowed.  The "user:"
    prefix is no longer allowed.

    It is recommended that the GLOBUS_ADMINS variable be set to
    a single non-human account name other than "root".  Making a
    human user an admin can cause problems if the account's owner
    leaves the organization.  Using "root" can cause problems if an
    NFS filesystem holding the data files is mounted in a way that
    maps the "root" account to "nobody".  My recommendation: Make the
    "globus" account the only administrative account, make sure any
    administrative users have access to that account.  Be careful not
    to give any untrusted users access to any administrative account.

    The gx-convert-log command supports changing the set of admins in an
    existing requests.log file.

Release 0.3, 2003-07-28

    This should probably be considered a beta release.  It included
    fixes for some fairly nasty bugs.  It was in use at SDSC and on
    several TeraGrid sites starting in July 2003.

Release 0.2, 2003-07-23

    This was an alpha release, reworked for use at multiple sites.
    It was used briefly at SDSC and on some TeraGrid sites.  It is
    no longer supported, and its use is not recommended.

Release 0.1, date unknown

    This was an SDSC internal system; it was never released.
